>> Jeff: So I am Jeff Moore.
I am software engineer with the Core Audio Group.
( Applause )
>> Jeff: This is, in fact, my presentation.
I'm here to introduce you to the Core Audio architecture and
some of the general concepts that have gone into its design.
In particular, I want to focus in on the property mechanism
that's used throughout most of the Core Audio APIs as well
as to talk a little bit about a concept
that we call format agnosticism,
which is another thing that runs throughout our APIs.
After that, I want to introduce you to some specific
Core Audio APIs by going over some simple usage cases,
including converting audio from one format to another,
reading and writing audio from a file, playing an effect,
applying an effect to some data,
and playing audio data to hardware.
Now for those of you that have taken a look at our API set,
you've noticed that there are an awful lot of headers spread
across several frameworks, but there
is some method there to that madness.
Now each individual Core Audio API is very focused
on the specific task that it was designed to handle.
It doesn't, it tries to not veer outside of the lines,
so to speak, as far as dealing with its own task.
But even though they are focused, all the APIs are also
cooperative in that they were designed to work well
with each other so that you can basically pick and choose
amongst the APIs to accomplish what you need to get done.
Now the API set is also a very layered architecture.
We kind of break it down into three layers.
At the lowest layer we have the APIs that deal primarily
with hardware, such as the I/O Audio driver family,
the audio how for talking to those
drivers, core midi and a few others.
And then we have the middle tier of our APIs and that's
where you're going to find all the workhorse APIs
in the Core Audio set and that includes
things such as the audio converter,
the audio file API, audio units, AU graph, etcetera.
Most of our APIs are going to fall
into this middle ware layer.
And finally we have a few high level APIs.
And when we talk about high level APIs, basically we just
mean an API that combines some of the lower level APIs
to synthesize a solution to a particular problem.
And APIs like that are the extended audio
file, Open AL and the audio queue API.
( Windows log off music followed by laughter.
>> Somebody rebooting Windows.
( Laughter )
Now, in the Core Audio API set, we do have this
concept called properties and the property mechanism
that we have is kind of a unification device,
because properties occur throughout our API set.
What a property is is basically a way to
access and manipulate some particular piece
of the state for a particular API object.
Now because the API objects more than likely have many, many
properties, each property has to have an address so that you
and the object know what you're talking about.
Now most of the APIs use just a simple
32 bit integer selector for this address,
although several of the APIs further qualify the
address using scope and element selectors as well.
Now the value of a property can be pretty much
any kind of data that the API has a need for.
In fact, in the APIs property values are actually
represented as a block of memory and a size
that says how much space that that memory is occupying.
Now, some of the APIs also provide what we call a listener
mechanism and that's just a way to install a callback
that you can get called whenever the
value of a particular property changes.
Now as I said, the property mechanism is a bit
of a unification device in our various APIs.
And as such, you're going to run into several common
routines in pretty much all the APIs that use properties.
Now the first routine that you're going to
run into is the get property info routine.
The get property info routine is used to discover whether or
not a property at that address exists, how big its value is,
and whether or not you can actually
change the value of that property.
Now the next pair of functions you're going to run into
quite a bit is the get property and set property functions.
And as their name implies, these are your basic accesser
methods for getting and setting the value of a property.
Now in the APIs that support listeners,
you will also see the add property listener
and remove property listener functions.
And those are there specifically to allow you to
install your callback so that it can get called
when a property you're interested in changes value.
Now I'd like to talk a little bit about
another concept that we have in the design
of Core Audio and that's formatting agnosticism.
Now by format agnosticism, all we really mean is that
you write your code in such a way that you're prepared
to handle pretty much any kind of data that the system
might throw at you, even data formats that aren't
on the system when you were writing that code.
And all of the Core Audio APIs are
designed with format agnosticism in mind.
They will go out of their way to
help you out in this regard.
And the reason why you want to do all of this is because,
as I said, you really want to be able to deal with any kind
of data your users might want to throw at you.
So it's best to kind of keep this in
mind when you're writing your code.
Now even though we try to be agnostic about what formats
we're using, the Core Audio APIs do designate linear PCM
with 32 bit floating point samples
as the canonical sample format.
Now the canonical sample format's job is really two fold.
First, it's going to be the default format you get in
absence of any other specified preference for a format.
In other words, whenever you bring up a new audio unit,
you're going to get the canonical
sample format, for example.
The other big job that the canonical sample format provides
is to be the intermediate format when doing conversions.
In other words, if you're trying to transform data in format
A into format B and there isn't a direct transformation,
the transformation is going to go from format A into
the canonical format and then from the canonical format
into format B. The canonical format
is always chosen to be big enough
to hold pretty much any kind of
data without losing any precision.
Now as I said, format agnosticism tries to
know as little about the data as possible,
but there is still a small amount of
information that you're going to need to know
in order to properly handle formatted data.
And in the Core Audio APIs we've kind of
boiled down a good portion of this information
into the structure called the audio
stream basic description.
Now audio stream basic description is a bit of a
mouthful and quite often you're going to see written
and in my talk you're going to
hear me use the abbreviation ASBD
and I really just mean an audio stream
basic description when I say that.
Now here you can see the declaration of an audio stream
basic description and there are quite a few fields in here.
Some of their usage should be obvious,
such as the sample rate field.
But some of them are a little less obvious.
Now the format ID and the format flags field are
there so that you can identify the general category
of audio data you're dealing with, such as
AAC or Linear PCM or MP3 or what have you.
The other fields that should be pretty
obvious are like the channels per frame field.
That just basically tells you how many
channels of audio are in this stream of data.
And then you have the bits per channel field,
the bytes per frame fields, the frames per packet
and bytes per packet field, and
these are just fields that are used
to describe how the audio data is
broken down in the stream in memory.
Now there are a lot of fields in an
ASBD and not every format actually needs
to use all those fields in order to describe itself.
Now in such a case, you will find that the fields that are
unknown or that are not applicable will be set to zero.
Now before we move on and look at a
few audio stream basic descriptions,
I just want to take a few minutes
to talk about some terminology.
Now the words sample frame and packet
are thrown about in computer science
and signal processing literature and
are very terribly overloaded terms.
But when we're talking about the core
audio APIs, we mean something very,
very specific when we say sample frame and packet.
A sample for us is a single data point
for one channel in an audio stream.
And then a frame is a collection of samples that
are all coincident at the same instant in time.
Now one interesting aspect of a frame is that when
you're talking about relating a data format to time,
the frame is really the smallest unit at which
you could measure time accurately with audio data.
Now the final term I want to talk a
little bit about is a very important term.
And it's important enough that we're going to
talk a lot more about it here in a few minutes.
But I just wanted to say that a
packet is, at it's simplest terms,
just a collection of frames that
go together for some purpose.
Now we're, like I said, we're going to talk a
little bit more about packets in a few moments.
Now here you see an audio stream basic description
structure filled out to represent a four channel stream
in the canonical sample format at a 44.1 sample rate.
And as you can go through, you can see each of the
fields are filled out to represent what that format is.
The sample rate is 44.1, the format ID and
format flags are specifically set for linear PCM
and the canonical sample format tags, which
are, as we recall, 32 bit floating2 point.
And then you have the bits per channel, which is 32.
And the channels per frame is four.
Now when it comes to the bytes per frame, as I said,
that's a collection of all the samples in that time,
so there are four channels, so that's
going to be four times four, which is 16.
Now one interesting aspect I want to point out
about linear PCM is that the number of frames
in a packet of linear PCM is always going to be one.
Now that seems kind of arbitrary, but it'll make a
little bit more sense when we talk about packets later.
Now here you see an audio stream basic description filled
out for a slightly more complicated linear PCM format.
Now this one has 24 bit samples, but they're carried within
a 32 bit word and 2you have two channels of them at 96K.
Now you can go through this and you
can see how all the fields are filled
out to represent pretty much exactly
what I said in the English here.
But I do want to point out a couple of
interesting things about this format.
Because you have a format that is 24 valid bits represented
in a 32 bit word, 2you can see some little discrepancies
between this ASBD and the previous ASBD I showed you.
In particular, you see that the bits per channel is
set to 24, but the bytes per frame is actually eight.
Now this is because each sample is actually 32 bits
wide, but only 24 of those bits are actually valid,
and so that comes out to 4 bytes per sample,
times two, which is eight bytes per frame.
Now the final ASBD I wanted to show you is
one here for AAC at a stereo AAC stream.
Now AAC is one of those formats that doesn't require
all the fields in an ASBD in order to describe itself.
So as you can see, several of the fields
here are set to zero to indicate this.
In fact, the only fields that are really interesting
to talk about width with AAC are the number of channels
in the channels per frame field
and the frames per packet field,
which tells you how much to expect
in each packet of AAC data.
Now in addition to audio stream basic descriptions,
some formats also require what we call a magic cookie.
Now a magic cookie is just a little blob of data
that provides some extra out of band information
about the specific instance of the
format of the data in the stream.
Now magic cookies, as I said, are very
particular to their stream of data so they have
to be paired with the stream at all times.
In fact, a magic cookie comes about as part of the encoding
process to create the stream of data and you absolutely have
to pass the magic cookie along in
order to properly decode the data.
Now as you might imagine, the magic cookie does
have some interesting bits of information in it.
But the contents of the magic cookie should be considered
opaque and you should treat it like a black box.
You shouldn't be dereferencing or
trying to parse a magic cookie.
Instead you should use the APIs that Core Audio provides
that allow you to probe the contents of a magic cookie
and extract much of the interesting bits of information.
Now I mentioned, we talked a little bit earlier about
packets in passing, and at that point I defined a packet
as a collection of frames that go together.
I want to strengthen that definition
a little bit here and define a packet
to be the smallest indivisible unit of a data format.
That is to say you can't really break that data
format down into pieces smaller than a packet.
Now from that definition you can pretty
much see why the number of frames per packet
in a linear PCM format is always going to be one.
Because that's the smaller unit at which
you can break a linear PCM stream up with.
Now there are basically three kinds of packetizations
that you're going to run into with various data formats.
Now the first is constant bit rate.
Now in a constant bit rate format each packet is going
to have both the same number of frames and it's going
to occupy the same number of bytes
in memory for each packet.
Now the most common constant bit
rate packet format is linear PCM.
You know, linear PCM you always knows how big a
packet's going to be by the definition of the format.
Now the next packetization you're going to
run into is what we call variable bit rate.
Now in a variable bit rate packetization, each
packet will have the same number of frames in it,
but the number of bytes that the packet
will occupy will vary from packet to packet.
In fact, the variable bit rate packetization scheme is
flexible enough and useful enough that it's used in most,
if not all, of the modern codecs that we use on the system,
such as AAC, Apple Lossless, MPEG1 Layer 3, etcetera.
Most of your common formats these days
are, in fact, variable bit rate in nature.
Now the final packetization type I want
to talk about is variable frame rate.
Now variable frame rate packetization has, each
packet in this format will have a different,
potentially a different number of frames and it will
potentially occupy a different number of bytes in memory.
Now this is a very generalized packet scheme and
the only commonly used codec that you're going to find
that uses this style of packetization
is the Ogg Vorbis codec.
Now in the Core Audio APIs we use the structure audio stream
packet description in order to identify a packet in memory.
But it's very unusual to run into an audio
stream packet description on its own.
More likely you're going to run into them in the
form of an array of packet descriptions that are used
to describe how another buffer of
memory is broken up into packets.
Now packet descriptions are absolutely
required when you're dealing
with a variable bit rate format
or a variable frame rate format.
And the reason should be obvious, when you see them in
memory there's no way to know where one packet begins
and the next packet ends without having a packet
description that tells you this information.
Now at the bottom of this slide you can see the declaration
of the audio stream packet description structure.
It has a field that has a byte
offset for the start of the packet.
It has a field to indicate how
many frames are in shit packet.
Now this field is going to be set to zero except
for variable frame rate packetization formats,
in which case they'll be set to the number
of frames that are in that particular packet.
And finally the audio stream packet description also has
a field for how many bytes the packet occupies in memory.
Now one interesting property that this definition of
a packet description gives you is that it allows you
to describe a buffer of memory where the audio
packets might be intermingled with other data,
such as ID3 tags or video frames or what have you.
Now to wrap up the first part of this talk, I'd like to talk
a little bit about how you'll go about filling out an ASBD,
because from what I've said so far,
you're probably looking to go wow.
You kind of have to know something about the format
you're dealing with in order to fill out the ASBD.
And in some cases that's true, but there are
some techniques you can use that can help you out
and kind of lift some of the burden of filling the ASBD out.
Now the first technique to use should be pretty obvious.
Just use the ASBDs that the Core Audio APIs hand to you.
Every Core Audio API uses an audio stream basic description
to describe the data that it wants and the data it produces.
So you should feel free to just ask the APIs your
interacting with to fill out your ASBDs for you.
Now in some cases you're still going
to have to fill them out by hand
and the APIs you're using aren't
going to be able to help you much.
In that case, we do have another API, the audio
format API, which can help you still fill out an ASBD,
provided that you have some other
bits of information to help it out.
Now the audio format API is just a collection of global
properties and its purpose is there to give you kind
of a handle on what formats, in terms of encoders
and decoders are installed on the system,
as well as other bits of information
about the encoders and decoders,
such as the name of the format, and a bunch of other things.
But there are also properties there that will help,
that will fill out an ASBD for you when all you happen
to have is the format ID of the format and a magic cookie.
Now the final technique I wanted to mention kind of in
passing, is to use the CA stream basic description class.
Now the CA stream basic description
is part of the Core Audio SDK.
As such, you'll find it in the developer
examples folder on your install right now.
And even though it is C++ code, and
if you're uncomfortable with C++,
I really advice you to take a look at the code anyway
and even if you're not going to use it directly,
there's probably a lot of good information in that
code that you can make use of in your own code.
Even to the point of just copying and pasting to
where ever you need it, as are all of the SDK codes.
They're really there to help you,
even if they are in C++.
I do encourage you to at least take a look
at them and be familiar with how they work.
Wrong way.
So that kind of wraps up the first part of
the talk where I've been kind of talking
in generalities about the Core Audio APIs.
Here for the second part of this talk, I'd like to move more
into some concrete examples of doing something and through
that introduce you to several of the
more commonly used Core Audio APIs.
Now the first task I want to talk about is
converting data from one format to another.
And the Core Audio API that you're going to use
to do this is the aptly named audio converter API.
In order to do a conversion, the first thing you
need to do is instantiate a new audio converter.
Now in order to do that, all you do is call audio
converter new and you have to pass the input format
and the output format to the audio converter new function.
Now one thing to be aware of is that the one or both
of the input or output formats has to be linear PCM.
In other words, you can use an encoder to go from an encoded
format to linear PCM or from linear PCM to an encoded format
or convert between the various linear PCM formats.
Now after you've instantiated your audio converter,
all the other settings that you need to make
on the converter are handled by setting properties.
Now some of the properties you're definitely going
to want to set include the magic cookie in case
of your dealing with a format that requires them.
And when you're doing an encoding, you're also going to want
to configure the encoder for such things as what quality
of encoding, what bit rate to run the encoder at, etcetera.
So when you have an audio converter, you
need to know how to get data out of it.
And the audio converter API provides to function
that you're going to want to use to do this.
Now the first function is a specialist
function, audio converter convert buffer.
It specializes in doing linear PCM to
linear PCM transformations provided
that they don't have any rate conversion.
This is useful in the cases where you are dealing with low
level stuff and you need to massage the linear PCM format
and you can just access directly the high
performance blisters in the audio converter.
But aside from that one special case, the general
routine that you're going to want to use for getting data
out of an audio converter is audio
converter fill complex buffer.
This is the routine that can handle every
kind of data that the system supports.
As such, along with the concept of format agnosticism,
this is really the routine you're going
to want to organize your code around.
So presuming you're using audio
converter fill complex buffer,
you're going to need to write an input data callback.
Now this is the function that the audio converter is going
to call whenever it needs to get
some new input data from you.
Now your input data callback has two basic jobs.
The first job is to provide the data in
order for the input side of the conversion.
Now the audio converter has been specifically
plumbed so that it minimizes the number
of copies involved in doing a particular transformation.
As such, your input data callback does not copy data.
Instead it has to provide a pointer to a buffer
containing the input data you want converted.
Now this buffer has to remain valid for the entire
duration of a call to audio converter fill complex buffer
and further has to be valid until the next time
you call audio converter fill complex buffer.
Now the other big job that you're input callback data has
to do is that it has to fill out the packet descriptions
in the case where you're dealing with
a format of data that requires them.
So you can get data in, you can get data out, of an
audio converter, what do you do when you're done?
How do you even know when you're done?
Well there are two cases that you really
ought to know about that signal the end
of the stream in a bit of a different way.
Now the first way is that in your input
callback, you return zero packets of data,
but you also return no error from the function.
Doing this will signify to the audio converter
that you are out of data and this is, in fact,
the logical end of the stream and that the converter
should not expect you to give it any more data.
Now the second mechanism that's used to indicate kind of an
end of stream situation is that if you return no data again,
but that you return an error code
from your input data callback.
Now by returning the error, you're indicating to the
converter that you don't have any input data to give it
at this point and time but you are not actually at the
logical end of stream and so that the converter should keep
on trying to get more data from you in the future.
So once you've signified the end of stream
and you're done with the conversion,
you still have a little bit more that you need to do.
In the case where you're going to reuse
that audio converter for something,
you have to make sure that you call audio converter
reset before you try to do a new conversion with it.
Now audio converter reset basically discards all
the internally cached data in the audio converter
and basically returns everything to its ground state.
Now another situation where you're
going to call audio converter reset is
if you're seeking around in a given data stream.
Now the reason why you want to do this
even if you're decoding the same string is
that most data formats have some kind of inter packet
dependency and by moving around in the packet stream,
you're going to need to make sure that the codec is returned
to its ground state before it tries
to decode anything further.
Now when you're dealing with audio formats that does imply
audio codec's and I've kind of mentioned codec's in passing.
Officially the audio codec's API,
they constitute the plug in mechanism
for both the audio converter API and the audio format API.
Now codecs come in two flavors.
You have encoders.
They take in linear PCM data and output their
encoded format and then you have decoders,
which take in the encoded format
and spit out the linear PCM data.
Now one of the other rules of an
audio codec is that it's expected
to be the expert format on the data format it works with.
And so the audio converter and the audio format API will
always defer questions about the formats to the audio codec.
Now in the case where you have both an encoder
and a decoder for a given format present,
the decoder is always consulted
prior to consulting any encoders.
Now when you're looking at what kind of
audio data to do for a particular job,
there are several factors you're going
to want to think about in the choosing.
Now the first factor is bit rate.
How much compression do you actually need?
And this is going to be governed
by the specific application.
Like the case of a telecommunications application,
you may only have a certain allocated
amount of bandwidth that you can use.
And in those cases you're going to need to
use a codec that can fit into that bandwidth.
Now along with the amount of compression, that's always
a trade off in terms of quality, so you're going to want
to balance the amount of compression that you need with
the audio signal quality that you get out of an encoder.
Most of the time you're going to
be trading one for the other.
Now another big factor in your decision is going
to be how much CPU does it cost to use this format?
If you're encoding, you're going to want to look
at how much CPU does it take to encode the format.
The same with decoding.
And another factor that a lot of people
don't necessarily think about when they think
about codecs is the latency in the codec.
Now all of these modern codecs are based on all
sorts of great signal processing and cool math tricks.
But all of these things have some inherent
amount of latency in the calculation.
That is, you'll stick some data in
but you'll have some extra silence put
out before you get your actual bits back out.
Now latency becomes a really important thing for certain
classes of applications, again, such as telecommunications.
And when you fall into that category you usually know it.
And the Core Audio system does provide codec's that
have excellent support for low latency characteristics.
Now, the final factor you're probably
going to look at is compatibility.
You're going to deploy your app in potentially
across several platforms and you're going to want
to make sure you pick a format that is
accessible and usable across all those formats.
So here's a little table I made that kind of compares and
contrasts some of the more common formats on the system.
Now the first format is 16 bit linear PCM.
I put that up there kind of to
give you a baseline for comparison.
And it's pretty much the uncompressed format of the data
and it doesn't actually incur any CPU cost to use it.
Now the next format on the chart is Apple Lossless.
Apple lossless, as it's name applies, doesn't
have any generation loss when you do the encoding.
In other words, the bits that you encode are
exactly the bits you get back when you decode them.
Now the cost for lossless is that it's somewhat more
expensive to code and decode, in terms of CPU cost,
and it doesn't support particularly low bit rates either.
Now Apple lossless is available across Mac OS
X and Windows, provided you have QuickTime.
The next format I want to talk about is IMA.
Now IMA is a fairly old codec standard.
It's been with us for a long time.
It basically provides a four to one
compression ratio and the quality,
though while not lossless, is still pretty high.
And the CPU cost of IMA is next to nothing,
it's basically a couple of multiplies and adds.
And the other great thing about IMA is that it
has absolutely no latency in it's encoding format.
Not the final three formats are
all variations of MPEG formats.
The first one is M-PEG4,AAC.
This is the format we use on the iTunes store.
This is the format that we've been
promoting in the system for a long time now.
Now much like these, all three of these
formats all can trade bit rate for quality.
But it's interesting to know when you compared and
contrast these three codecs together you will get,
they kind of fall in about that order in
terms of quality at the same bit rate.
I kind of want to point out a little bit about M-PEG4,AAC-LD.
This is a new codec in Leopard.
You might have heard it mentioned yesterday in the keynote,
as iChat has delivered a significant quality improvement
to its users because they've switched
over to using the AAC-LD codec.
Now AAC-LD is a modified form of AAC and it has a slightly
worse quality at the same bit rate as regular AAC.
But what you get for that slight trade off is a
significantly improved latency performance in the codec,
which was a key feature for getting
iChat on board for using it.
And the final entry in the table is MPEG1 layer 3, aka KA MP3.
And I threw that up there because it pretty much everybody
has a file somewhere in MP3 and it's good to look at that
because it's so common throughout the
various platforms you're likely to use.
Now I'd like to move on to talking about
reading and writing audio data to a file.
The aptly named audio file API is the API
basically you're going to use for doing all of that.
The audio file API provides a set of global properties
that allow you to find out all the readable file types,
all the writable file types, and then for each of those file
types, what kinds of data you can put in each one of them.
These properties are kind of the audio file
equivalent to what the audio format API provides
with the audio converter and
describing the actual data formats.
When you specify a file to the audio file API,
you can do that either using a CF URL that points
to a file system object, in other words a file
calling URL, or you can use a Carbon FS Ref.
Now when you want to create a new file with the audio
file API, you need to have the audio file type ID.
That basically says what kind of file you want to
create, such as AIFF or MPEG4 or what have you.
You need to know the ASBD of the format of
the data you're going to put in the file.
And then any other information you need to include
in the file such as magic cookies or meta data,
such as regions or markers or what have you.
All of that stuff is taken care of after creating
the file by setting properties on the file object.
Now when you're accessing an existing
file, much like most file system APIs,
you just simply open those APIs, or open those files.
And then you can find out all the information about the
file by accessing the various properties, such as the ASBD
and the magic cookie for the format, the channel layout for
a multi channel situation, the various packet descriptions
for the data and other kinds of Meta data, markers,
regions, lyrics, album covers, what have you.
Now one word of warning, when you're trying to
access the packet table of certain kinds of files,
you're potentially going to have
a pretty large performance hit.
The reason for this is that some formats of
data such as MPEG1 files and ADTS and AC-3 files,
they don't have a packet table, per say, rather
that they have an implicit packet table is signaling
in the stream itself so that in order to
discover the packet table, you have to go through
and parse every single packet in the data stream.
And as you can imagine, for even small files,
that can be a significant performance hit
in order to calculate that information.
As such, the audio file API tries to provide as much
estimations for the sorts of things you're going to want
to access the packet table for, such as the upper
bound on the size of a packet in the stream,
as well as an estimate of how long,
in terms of real time, the file takes.
And you should use these alternatives if you can,
rather than necessarily incurring the overhead of having
to parse the entire file to get the packet table.
Now, in the audio file API, reading and
writing data work basically the same way.
In fact, the API calls all have
basically the same set of arguments.
And they all have the same characteristics
in terms of behavior.
Both reading and writing are blocking calls.
That means that when you make the audio file read or
audio file write call, that file is not going to return
until either there's some kind of system
error, in which case that'll be reported
to you, or the request you made is satisfied.
So you should keep that in mind
when you're making these calls.
Now another thing that you can do with these calls is you
can say whether or not you want the audio file API to read
or write the data through the system cache.
This is a performance optimization, because you
may or may not want to incur the extra overhead
of sticking the data in the file
in the general system cache.
Usually you don't want to do this in the case where
you're just reading a packet of data from the disk once,
potentially maybe to play it to
the hardware or what have you.
Now both the audio file read and
write calls come in two flavors.
There's a form that works in terms of bytes and
there's another form that works in terms of packets.
Now while generally you can do it in terms of bytes for
pretty much any format, we've been talking a little bit
about format agnosticism and this is another place where
that creeps in to things, you're rally going to want to deal
with these formats in terms of whole packets.
It's just the only way to handle
variable bit rate data, for example.
But generally speaking, if you're dealing with things
in terms of whole packets, it's just generally easier
to compute things like durations and
to keep track of the data in memory.
Now after you're done writing to the file, the
audio file API has an optimization routine.
And you can call that routine on a file to
cause the file to be rewritten in such a way
that it can improve the actually access
performance to the data in the file.
Now the audio file API is all well and good,
it's fairly robust and has a lot of stuff in it,
but we also have another API called the extended audio file
API and it unites an audio file with an audio converter.
And this allows you to easily read and write
files in whatever format you want while being able
to do all the book keeping an what
not in terms of linear PCM.
This is a conceptual thing that can simplify
the code that you have to write in terms
of handling all the various kinds of formats.
Just like the audio file API, the extended audio
file API can read and write to existing files.
It can create new files.
In fact, creating an opening with the extended audio
file is very analogous to the regular audio file API
and everything I've talked about so far
applies to the extended audio file as well.
And once you've created or opened a file with the
extended audio file API, you have to also set a property
after the fact that will tell the extended
audio file what data format you want to give it,
or if you're reading what format you want it to give you.
Now when you're using the extended audio file API,
because it deals with everything as if it were linear PCM,
all the reading, writing, file positions, sizes, etcetera,
are always handled in terms of whole sample frames.
And much like the regular audio file
API, the extended audio file reads block.
But the rights come in two flavors.
There's the blocking version, but there's also a non
blocking asynchronous version that's pretty useful
in lots of debugging context.
You can, for example, you can use the non blocking
form of extended audio file write from an I/O context,
which is a place where timing of
everything is very critical.
Now I'd like to talk a little bit about
adding an effect to some audio data.
And when you do that in the context of
Core Audio, you're going to be talking
about the audio units that we shit on the system.
Now an audio unit is a plug-in for encapsulating
some kind of signal processing operation.
Audio units can live on their own, but their
generally can be, assembled together in either manually
or using the AU graph API to make a collection of them
that can perform more complex signal processing operations.
Now when you're dealing with I/O in an audio unit, all
the I/O has always done in a canonical sample format,
it can be at any sample rate, but it's always
going to be at the canonical sample format.
There are a couple of exceptions.
Converter audio units and output audio units can be a
little more flexible with the kind of data they can take in,
and we'll talk a little more about that in a minute.
Audio units also can provide one or more GUI
components that your application can show to the user
so that the user can interact with the audio
unit and can shape the sound that it creates.
And in addition to properties, audio
units also make use of parameters.
Now a parameter differs from a
property in a couple of key ways.
First, parameters only apply to things that modify
the real time aspect of the signal processing.
Further, parameters are always 32 bit floating2 point values.
Now the range and the meaning of that 32 bit
flow is going to vary from parameter to parameter
and you can get the audio unit to fill
out an audio unit parameter infrastructure
that can describe the usage of the parameter to you.
Now parameters can be, the changes to a
parameter can be scheduled in advance,
and the changes can also be ramped smoothly from
one value to another over some length of time.
Both of those operations are absolutely key to using an
audio unit in a digital audio workstation environment
where you might be automating the
process of the data over time.
Now the I/O of an audio unit is organized into a bus.
Now each bus on an audio unit has some number of channels
and each audio unit can have potentially
many input busses and output busses.
Now each bus will also have an audio
channel layout that can describe the usage
of each channel in a multi channel context.
And when you're dealing with the audio unit API itself and
you're talking about properties that relate to the input
and output busses, the actual bus number is passed to
the audio unit as the element in the property address.
Now in order to set up an audio unit to render
some data, the first thing you have to do is locate
and open the audio unit and this is
done using the component manager.
This means you're going to use routines like find
next component and open a component, etcetera,
in order to locate the audio unit
component that you're interested in.
Once you've opened the audio unit,
you configure the audio unit by again,
just like every other Core Audio
object, you set properties on it.
Things such as the sample rate and the maximum number of
frames that you're going to ask the audio unit to render
at a given time have to be set at this time.
You also set up any algorithm specific attributes, such as
rendering quality or pointing the audio unit at data files
such as samples or impulse responses or what have you.
And then at this point you're also going to want to set up
whatever the audio unit has to whatever other audio units
that you're using and you're also going to use this
point to install the various callbacks you're going
to need in order to do the various processing.
Now in order to get processed data out of the audio unit,
the first step after you configure
it is to call audio unit initialize.
This tells the audio unit that you're done configuring
it and that it's okay for the audio unit to go ahead
and finalize it's setup and allocate buffers, set up delay
lines, basically get itself ready in order to do processing.
Now once you've initialized the audio
unit, you call audio unit render in order
to have the audio unit provide you with data.
Now when you call audio unit render, you pass in a
time stamp that indicates the position in the stream
that you want the audio unit to render for.
You also have to tell the audio
unit how many frames to render.
And recall that this number that you tell it
can't be larger than the maximum frame size
that you set earlier in the configuration step.
Now you will also pass in an audio buffer list
that can either be populated with buffers,
in which case you're telling the audio unit that you
would like it to render into the buffers that you provide,
or you can populate the audio buffer list with nulls, in
which case you're telling the audio unit that you want it
to render into it's own buffers and
then provide you with pointers to them.
Now both of those options are important for when you're
trying to optimize the signal flow in your application
so that you can minimize the number
of copies that occur in the operation.
And finally, much like the audio converter, the
audio units have a reset method that is there
to return the audio unit to it's ground state.
And you're going to call this to do things like
quiet reverb tails, stop delay lines, etcetera.
Basically return the audio unit to its
just after being initialized state.
So you can get data out of the audio unit,
you also have the task of getting the data
into the audio unit that you want to process.
Now there are two ways that you
can get audio into the audio unit.
The first way is that the audio
can come from another audio unit.
You can manually use the make connection property
on the audio unit to directly connect and input bus
of the audio unit to another audio unit's output bus.
When you make that connection, whenever you
ask the audio unit to render on that bus,
he's going to go pull on the output bus of
the other audio unit to get his input data.
Now manual connections are good, but
the AU graph API is there specifically
to help you manage all the complexity involved with
dealing with the connectiveness of your audio units.
Now another way you can get input data into
the audio unit is to use the render callback.
The render callback is called by the audio unit
whenever it needs new input data to process.
And you install your render callback
using the set render callback property.
Now one thing to note about these two methods is that
they are mutually exclusive on a bus by bus basis.
That is on a given bus you can either connect it to
another audio unit or you can install an input callback
to provide the data, but you can't do both.
Now OS X ships a lot of audio units and this is a
partial list of some of them and it's a list of also some
of the general categories of audio
units that are in the system.
You have effects, music effects, which are things
like delays and filters, EQs, what have you.
The different between an effect and music effect is music
effects can process their control information from midi.
And you have panner units.
Panner units are there to manipulate the spatialization
of a signal and we have units that do HRTF panning,
vector panning, sound field panning, etcetera.
Then we have format converter audio units.
Now I mentioned format converter audio units
earlier in that they're one of the kinds
of audio units that can take non canonical format data.
And the reason for that is some of them actually have
an audio converter built into them, but not all of them.
But mostly the key aspect of a format converter is how the
cadence at which they're going to pull for their input data.
Then you have generators and music devices.
Generators and music devices represent
sources of audio in a graph of audio units.
And the difference between a music device and a
generator is that music devices are representative
of software synthesizers, whereas
generators provide a much wider range
of things that can provide sound into the system.
And then you have mixers, which are pretty
standard signal processing operations.
We have several mixers on the system, including a stereo
mixer, a mixer that does 3D mixing, the matrix mixer,
which is for handling for routing and other forms of
complex mixing operations and there are a couple of others.
Finally you have output units,
AU Hal being the primary example.
Output units are the synchs in a graph.
They're basically the place where audio goes to
exit the graph and to be handed off to places
like the hardware or to be written to a file.
And then the final kind of audio that
I want to mention is the offline unit.
An offline unit is a special kind of audio unit
where the signal processing operation involved
requires either random access to the audio stream data,
or it requires to be able to see all of the data
ahead of time before it can do it's processing.
An example of an offline unit is normalization.
Now I'd like to wrap up this part of the talk by
talking about how you output data to the hardware
and actually get it to come out of the speaker.
Now in the Core Audio API set there are probably more
ways to output data to the speaker than there are
to do just about any other kind of tasks.
I'm going to talk about four basic ways right now, in fact.
The first one I want to talk about
is using the audio how directly.
Now the Audio HAL, as you might recall
from earlier, is a very low level API.
The Audio HAL's job is to be focused on providing
access to the audio hardware on the audio devices terms.
That is the Audio HAL does not provide
convenience functions and it doesn't emulate things
that they audio device doesn't actually do.
For example, the HAL will not provide volume control on
a channel if the hardware does not actually support it.
Now as such, the HAL's a pretty complex beast
and applications that use it are expected to deal
with all the various notifications and all the
changes in state that the HAL will provide that relate
to the ever evolving state of the
audio hardware on the system.
Applications are also expected to handle all their
own mixing and also all their own format conversions
so that they can provide the data to the hardware
in the format that the hardware is expecting.
Now one other aspect of using the how, is that when you're
inside your I/O Proc, which is the callback the HAL will call
when it wants to get some data for output from you,
you have to make sure that you're not going to block.
This is very important because this thread has to meet
a deadline and when you block there's no guarantee
that you're going to get back to the thread in
any time reasonable for making the deadline.
Now given all the complexities of using
the how and being a proper how client,
generally it's not recommended for
most applications to use the how.
Instead, most applications should probably look at using AU
HAL, which is the output audio unit that talks to the how
in order to send the data on a graph
of audio units out to the hardware.
Now AU HAL is an output audio unit and
everything I've mentioned up to now
about dealing with audio units definitely applies.
The main difference between output units and the rest
of the audio units is that output units add to routines,
to the audio output start and stop methods.
And these routines are used to start and stop IO.
Now AU HAL is there to do all the heavy lifting and all that
complex code for being a proper how client on your behalf
so that your application doesn't have to.
one of the big jobs that it does is it takes the wide
variety of formats you're liked to get from an audio device
and massages it down so that it appears in the audio
unit world as just one input bus on the audio unit,
and this saves you a lot of hassle and
it kind of normalizes things out so
that it makes it easy to feed data to the hardware.
Now AU HAL comes in two basic flavors.
There is the basic AU how flavor and it
tracks the device that you tell it to.
You can go to the how and say I want to use the built in
speaker, and it will track that device across any changes
or whether it gets unplugged or what have you.
Now the other kind of AU how output
unit is the default output unit.
Now the default output units only differ from the regular
AU HAL class in terms of what device that they track.
The default output units come in two flavors.
There's the regular default output unit that
tracks the how's content default device,
which is the device that the system has designated
for all content output such as the out put
for iTunes, or QuickTime Player or what have you.
And then there's the system default device and
that's the device that's used for interface sounds.
And they may not be the same device, so you have
to make sure in the case where you want to deal
with default device that you open the right component.
Now one other interesting aspect of AU how is that
it provides an audio converter on its input bus,
but this audio converter supports only linear PCM data.
But this does give you an added bonus of flexibility
in terms of what kind of data you can supply
to the output unit in order to map it onto the hardware.
Now when you're dealing with AU HAL,
you can deal with mixing in two ways.
You can either install a render callback and do it
yourself, or you can connect a mixer unit to the input bus
and connect your input data to the
various inputs of the mixer audio unit.
Now one thing to be aware of with AU HAL is that
when you're inside your render callback for AU HAL,
you're also on the HAL's IO Proc so all
those rules I mentioned earlier still apply.
Now the next method I want to talk about for
outputting data to the hardware is for using OpenAL.
OpenAL is a high level API that
provides cross platform 3D audio mixing.
And while OpenAL has mostly been
tailored for the needs of game developers,
we found that it can be very useful
in a wide variety of context.
And if you need cross platform support,
OpenAL is a pretty good place to start.
Now the Mac OS X implementation of OpenAL is built on
top of the 3D mixer audio unit that I mentioned earlier.
And I'm not going to go into too much more detail about Open
AL because we're going to have a great demo about OpenAL
in the very next session here, in
the Core Audio hands-on session.
And the final way I'd like to talk about for outputting
data to the hardware is using the Audio Queue API.
The audio queue is a new API in Leopard that provides
a very high level API for playing audio data.
It can handle both linear PCM and compressed audio data,
but one of the interesting aspects about the queue is
that it owns the buffers that you're
going to be filling up to play.
Now the queue also supports very rich timing mechanisms and
it also has support for scheduled playback of your sound.
And again, much like OpenAL we're going
to talk a lot more about the audio queue
in the next session, the audio hands-on session.
So to kind of think back I've been talking about the core
audio architecture in general, what sort of APIs we have,
and I've gone into some usage cases at kind of a
10,000 foot level to kind of introduce you to some
of the Core Audio APIs you're going to end up using.
And the next session, as I said earlier, is the
Core Audio hands on session where you're going
to get some more practical experience with the Core Audio
APIs, in particular we're going to talk about playing
and recording with the audio queue, using
the audio file and audio file streams APIs,
using the extended audio file API and more about OpenAL.
Now there are a lot of resources out there that you can use
to find out more about Core Audio and its architecture.
There's documents, including the Core Audio Overview,
Getting Started With Audio, and various programming guides,
including The Audio Unit Programming Guide, and
the new Audio Queue Services Programming Guide,
which you can get from the WWDC attendee site.
You'll also find tech notes and sample code
on the developer website at the URL here.
And again, here are some more resources I'd like
to particularly plug, the Core Audio SDK again.
There's a lot of code in there, and even though a lot
of it is C++, you can adapt it pretty much
to whatever you're trying to do, and there's a
lot of knowledge kind of coded up in that SDK.
And finally, I just want to plug our mailing list.
The Core Audio API mailing list is probably
the best way to get in touch with us.
All of the Core Audio engineering staff monitors
that list and we answer questions all the time there.